squats are the king of poorly performed
exercises do them wrong and instead of
growing nice quads and glutes you'll
feel aches and pains in your knees your
hips and even your shoulders but follow
these four easy steps and I guarantee
your squats will feel better and grow
your muscles far better than they ever
have before
step one setup your Anatomy will
determine what your perfect squat looks
like so it's important to find the right
setup for you and your body before you
even get under the bar let's start with
your footsteps hold the light weight at
your chest set your feet hip width apart
and squat down see how that feels and
make note of how low you should get then
widen it by an inch or two and compare
even the slightest modification can make
a world of difference for knee and hip
pain so keep going until you find what
feels best and enables you to squat the
lowest as for your foot angle most
people's joints will feel better with
their toes pointed out slightly so don't
force yourself to keep them straight and
The Wider The Stance you use the more
your toes will have to turn out once
you've found the right stance hello
there it's time to grab the bar
set your feet under the bar bend your
knees to get under it and then place the
bar on your upper back but avoid placing
it too high on the little bony bump at
the base of your neck it should be
placed right onto the meat of your traps
next grip the bar with your hands as
narrow as you can without feeling pain
in your wrists shoulders or elbows the
narrower they are the more upper back
tightness and stability you'll have when
you squat but if you have really tight
shoulders or chest muscles you may have
to widen this once you grab the bar Walk
It Out by extending your legs to lift it
out of the rack and then taking three
careful steps
take a little step back with one foot a
little step back with your second foot
and then use the third step to widen or
adjust your feet to your ideal squat
stance lastly to keep you balanced as
you squat spread your weight evenly over
your foot by making sure each foot has
three solid points of contact with the
ground your big toe your pinky toe and
your heel you're now ready for step two
creating whole body tension now at this
point you do not want to just squat down
you need to First activate several key
muscles that will protect your back and
keep you strong as you squat down
failure to do this is why so many people
have a really strong leg press but I
have a much weaker and unstable squat
what start with the lower body screw
your feet into the ground as if you were
trying to touch your heels together then
level your pelvis with the floor by
tilting it back as if it was a bowl of
water and you were trying to prevent it
from spilling once adjusted lock this in
by squeezing your inner thighs glutes
and quads for the upper body avoid
pointing your elbows back and losing
tightness in your upper back
instead pull your elbows forward under
the bar and pull the bar down into your
media upper traps as if you're trying to
bend the bar in half this helps activate
your lats and keeps your upper back
stable
finally take a deep 360 breath into your
waist as if you're trying to expand all
sides of a weight belt and then brace
your core as if you just coughed really
hard at this point you should feel your
legs core and lats all working you're
ready for step three The Descent
pull yourself down into the squat using
your hamstrings let your butt drop down
between your heels and push your knees
out in the same direction as your toes
keep your upper back tight by pulling
the bar down and continue lowering as
deep as you comfortably can as for how
deep you should go a 2019 study assigned
one group of subjects to half squats and
another group to deep squats twice a
week for 10 weeks although both groups
had similar growth in the quads the
glutes and abductors grew significantly
more in the Deep squat group so your
goal should be to squat down to at least
somewhere close to parallel if you use a
narrower stance you should be able to
get a little bit deeper if you use a
wider stance it'll be closer to parallel
but if towards the bottom of your squat
your upper body falls forward or your
heels come off the ground or your lower
back rounds excessively into Butt Wink
these are all signs that you're not yet
ready to go that deep and there's two
main reasons for this the most common
reason is the limited ankle mobility in
this case try elevating your heels onto
weight plates and see if that helps the
other reason is a weak core and glutes
in this case you can try out a more
stable exercise like Smith machine
squats before progressing to the barbell
but once you can get deep enough you may
notice that your knees end up over your
toes this is commonly believed to be
harmful on the knees
one study tested this by using a wooden
barrier to prevent the knees from going
over the toes while there was a bit less
pressure on the knees when compared to
letting them travel over the toes the
stress on the hips and lower back
significantly increased so as long as
your knees don't cave in or out and
instead push out in the same direction
as your toes letting your knees go over
your toes is perfectly fine now once you
reach that bottom position do not just
let gravity drop you into that last
introduce research suggests this is the
most important part of the movement for
growth so force your muscles to work by
controlling the weight down and pausing
at that bottom position for half a
second before moving on to step four the
ascent but first just keep in mind that
everyone's bodies are different to
maximize growth and prevent injury it's
important that you find the right
exercises and the right form for your
individual structure and for
step-by-step plan that takes care of all
the guesswork for you after this video
just head on over to
builtwithscience.com and take our free
analysis quiz to find the best program
for you and your body but for now let's
move on to step four the ascent
the most common mistake people make here
is shooting their hips back and letting
their upper body fall forward this puts
a lot of pressure on the lower back we
want the chest and hips to rise at the
same rate to do this drive up out of the
Bottom by pushing the floor away and
thinking about driving your traps up
against the bar keep your glutes engaged
by keeping your knees in line with your
toes rather than keeping them in
continue pushing down against the floor
and getting tall until your legs are
fully extended but as you come to the
top avoid letting out a big exhale
instead we want to maximize the pressure
in your abdomen to protect your back and
you can do this by keeping your lips
held tighter together as you breathe out
to gradually let air out once you've let
all the air out take another deep 360
breath in brace and repeat for another
rep congrats my friend you have just
done the perfect squat you can give this
video a watch next to learn how to
properly deadlift without hurting your
back and I'll see you next time